				  INTRODUCTION

FLASH (Fast Length Adjustment of SHort reads) is a very accurate and fast tool
to merge paired-end reads that were generated from DNA fragments whose lengths
are shorter than twice the length of reads.  Merged read pairs result in
unpaired longer reads.  Longer reads are generally more desired in genome
assembly and genome analysis processes.

FLASH cannot merge paired-end reads that do not overlap.  It also cannot merge
jumping read pairs that have an outward orientation (but these reads tend not to
overlap anyway).

				  INSTALLATION

FLASH runs on UNIX-compatible systems only (including GNU/Linux).

The only dependency, other than functions that are expected to be available in
the C library, is the zlib data compression library.

To install FLASH, download the tarball, untar it, and compile the code using the
provided Makefile:

$ tar xzf FLASH-1.2.1.tar.gz
$ cd FLASH-1.2.1
$ make

The executable file that is produced is named 'flash'.

By default, FLASH uses multiple threads.  There are "combiner" threads that do
the actual read combining, as well as 5 threads that are used for I/O (2
readers, 3 writers).  The default number of combiner threads is the number of
processors; however, it can be adjusted with the -t  option (long option:
--threads).

When multiple combiner threads are used, the order of the combined and
uncombined reads in the output files will be nondeterministic.  If you need to
enforce that the output reads appear in the same order as the input, you must
specify --threads=1, or compile FLASH without support for multiple threads (see
below).

FLASH may be configured at compile-time to be entirely single-threaded.  If you
would like to do this, you may unset the 'MULTITHREADED' variable in the
Makefile.

				     USAGE

Usage: flash [OPTIONS] MATES_1.FASTQ MATES_2.FASTQ

DESCRIPTION:

FLASH (Fast Length Adjustment of SHort reads) is an accurate and fast tool
to merge paired-end reads that were generated from DNA fragments whose
lengths are shorter than twice the length of reads.  Merged read pairs result
in unpaired longer reads.  Longer reads are generally more desired in genome
assembly and genome analysis processes.

MANDATORY INPUT:

To run FLASH, you must provide two FASTQ files of paired-end reads.
Corresponding read pairs must be in the same order in both files.

OPTIONS:

  -m, --min-overlap=NUM   The minimum required overlap length between two
                          reads to provide a confident overlap.  Default:
                          10bp.

  -M, --max-overlap=NUM   Maximum overlap length expected in approximately
                          90% of read pairs.  It is by default set to 70bp,
                          which works well for 100bp reads generated from a
                          180bp library, assuming a normal distribution of
                          fragment lengths.  Overlaps longer than the maximum
                          overlap parameter are still considered as good
                          overlaps, but the mismatch density (explained below)
                          is calculated over the first max_overlap bases in
                          the overlapped region rather than the entire
                          overlap.  Default: 70bp, or calculated from the
                          specified read length, fragment length, and fragment
                          length standard deviation.

  -x, --max-mismatch-density=NUM
                          Maximum allowed ratio between the number of
                          mismatched base pairs and the overlap length.
                          Two reads will not be combined with a given overlap
                          if that overlap results in a mismatched base density
                          higher than this value.  Note: Any occurence of an
                          'N' in either read is ignored and not counted
                          towards the mismatches or overlap length.  Our
                          experimental results suggest that higher values of
                          the maximum mismatch density yield larger
                          numbers of correctly merged read pairs but at
                          the expense of higher numbers of incorrectly
                          merged read pairs.  Default: 0.25.

  -p, --phred-offset=OFFSET
                          The smallest ASCII value of the characters used to
                          represent quality values of bases in FASTQ files.
                          It should be set to either 33, which corresponds
                          to the later Illumina platforms and Sanger
                          platforms, or 64, which corresponds to the
                          earlier Illumina platforms.  Default: 33.

  -r, --read-len=LEN
  -f, --fragment-len=LEN
  -s, --fragment-len-stddev=LEN
                          Average read length, fragment length, and fragment
                          standard deviation.  These are convenience parameters
                          only, as they are only used for calculating the
                          maximum overlap (--max-overlap) parameter.
                          The maximum overlap is calculated as the overlap of
                          average-length reads from an average-size fragment
                          plus 2.5 times the fragment length standard
                          deviation.  The default values are -r 100, -f 180,
                          and -s 18, so this works out to a maximum overlap of
                          70 bp.  If --max-overlap is specified, then the
                          specified value overrides the calculated value.

                          If you do not know the standard deviation of the
                          fragment library, you can probably assume that the
                          standard deviation is 10% of the average fragment
                          length.

  -o, --output-prefix=PREFIX
                          Prefix of output files.  Default: "out".

  -d, --output-directory=DIR
                          Path to directory for output files.  Default:
                          current working directory.

  -c, --to-stdout         Write the combined reads to standard output; do not
                          write uncombined reads to anywhere.

  -z, --compress          Compress the FASTQ output files with zlib.

  -t, --threads=NTHREADS  Set the number of worker threads.  This is in
                          addition to the I/O threads.  Ignored if support
                          for multiple threads was not compiled in.  Default:
                          number of processors.  Note: if you need FLASH's
                          output to appear deterministically or in the some
                          order as the original reads, you must specify
                          -t 1 (--threads=1).

  -h, --help              Display this help and exit.

  -v, --version           Display version.

				  PERFORMANCE

FLASH is extremely fast tool for merging mates from short paired-end library. It
processes one million 100-bp read pairs in 120 seconds on a server with 256 GB
of RAM and a six-core 2.4 GHz AMD Opteron, or in 129 seconds on a desktop with 2
GB of RAM and a dual-core Intel Xeon 3.00 GHz CPU.

				    ACCURACY

With reads' error rate of 1% or less, FLASH processes over 99% of read pairs
correctly. With error rate of 2%, FLASH processes over 98% of read pairs
correctly when default parameters are used. With more aggressive parameters
(i.e., -x 0.35), FLASH processes over 90% of read pairs correctly even when the
error rate is 5%.


			  COMMENTS/QUESTIONS/REQUESTS

Send an e-mail to flash.comment@gmail.com

Other versions are available from the SourceForge page:

https://sourceforge.net/projects/flashpage/
