                                  INTRODUCTION

FLASH (Fast Length Adjustment of SHort reads) is a very accurate and fast tool
to merge paired-end reads that were generated from DNA fragments whose lengths
are shorter than twice the length of reads.  Merged read pairs result in
unpaired longer reads.  Longer reads are generally more desired in genome
assembly and genome analysis processes.

FLASH cannot merge paired-end reads that do not overlap.  It also cannot merge
jumping read pairs that have an outward orientation (but these reads tend not to
overlap anyway).  FLASH also is not designed for data that has a significant
portion of indel errors (such as Sanger sequencing data).

                                  INSTALLATION

On UNIX-compatible systems, including GNU/Linux and Mac OS X, you must compile
FLASH from source.  The only dependency, other than functions that are expected
to be available in the C library, is the zlib data compression library.  To
install FLASH, download the tarball, untar it, and compile the code using the
provided Makefile:

$ tar xzf FLASH-1.2.9-beta.tar.gz
$ cd FLASH-1.2.9-beta
$ make

The executable file that is produced is named 'flash'.  To run it from the
command line you must copy it to a location on your $PATH variable, or else run
it with a path including a directory, such as "./flash".

FLASH also runs on Windows, and you can compile it on Windows using MinGW.
However, for convenience you may instead download a standalone Windows binary
from the SourceForge page (https://sourceforge.net/projects/flashpage/).

                                 MULTITHREADING

By default, FLASH uses multiple threads.  There are "combiner" threads that do
the actual read combining, as well as 5 threads that are used for I/O (2
readers, 3 writers).  The default number of combiner threads is the number of
processors; however, it can be adjusted with the -t  option (long option:
--threads).

When multiple combiner threads are used, the order of the combined and
uncombined reads in the output files will be nondeterministic.  If you need to
enforce that the output reads appear in the same order as the input, you must
specify --threads=1.

                                     USAGE

Usage: flash [OPTIONS] MATES_1.FASTQ MATES_2.FASTQ

MANDATORY INPUT:

To run FLASH, you may provide two FASTQ files of paired-end reads
where corresponding paired reads are in the same order in both files.
Alternatively, you may provide one FASTQ file, which may be standard input,
containing interleaved paired-end reads (see the --interleaved option).
The input FASTQ files may be either plain-text or compressed with gzip.
Other compression formats for the input files are not yet supported.

OUTPUT:

The default output of FLASH is a FASTQ file containing the extended fragments
produced by combining read pairs, two FASTQ files containing read pairs
that were not combined, and histogram files that show the distribution of
lengths of the extended fragments.  Writing the uncombined read pairs to an
interleaved FASTQ file is also supported.  Also, writing the extended
fragments directly to standard output is supported.  Plain-text and gzip
output formats are natively supported; other compression formats are
supported indirectly via the --compress-prog option.

OPTIONS:

  -m, --min-overlap=NUM   The minimum required overlap length between two
                          reads to provide a confident overlap.  Default:
                          10bp.

  -M, --max-overlap=NUM   Maximum overlap length expected in approximately
                          90% of read pairs.  It is by default set to 70bp,
                          which works well for 100bp reads generated from a
                          180bp library, assuming a normal distribution of
                          fragment lengths.  Overlaps longer than the maximum
                          overlap parameter are still considered as good
                          overlaps, but the mismatch density (explained below)
                          is calculated over the first max_overlap bases in
                          the overlapped region rather than the entire
                          overlap.  Default: 70bp, or calculated from the
                          specified read length, fragment length, and fragment
                          length standard deviation.

  -x, --max-mismatch-density=NUM
                          Maximum allowed ratio between the number of
                          mismatched base pairs and the overlap length.
                          Two reads will not be combined with a given overlap
                          if that overlap results in a mismatched base density
                          higher than this value.  Note: Any occurence of an
                          'N' in either read is ignored and not counted
                          towards the mismatches or overlap length.  Our
                          experimental results suggest that higher values of
                          the maximum mismatch density yield larger
                          numbers of correctly merged read pairs but at
                          the expense of higher numbers of incorrectly
                          merged read pairs.  Default: 0.25.

  -p, --phred-offset=OFFSET
                          The smallest ASCII value of the characters used to
                          represent quality values of bases in FASTQ files.
                          It should be set to either 33, which corresponds
                          to the later Illumina platforms and Sanger
                          platforms, or 64, which corresponds to the
                          earlier Illumina platforms.  Default: 33.

  -r, --read-len=LEN
  -f, --fragment-len=LEN
  -s, --fragment-len-stddev=LEN
                          Average read length, fragment length, and fragment
                          standard deviation.  These are convenience parameters
                          only, as they are only used for calculating the
                          maximum overlap (--max-overlap) parameter.
                          The maximum overlap is calculated as the overlap of
                          average-length reads from an average-size fragment
                          plus 2.5 times the fragment length standard
                          deviation.  The default values are -r 100, -f 180,
                          and -s 18, so this works out to a maximum overlap of
                          65 bp.  If --max-overlap is specified, then the
                          specified value overrides the calculated value.

                          If you do not know the standard deviation of the
                          fragment library, you can probably assume that the
                          standard deviation is 10% of the average fragment
                          length.

  --cap-mismatch-quals    Cap quality scores assigned at mismatch locations
                          to 2.  This was the default behavior in FLASH v1.2.7
                          and earlier.  Later versions will instead calculate
                          such scores as max(|q1 - q2|, 2); that is, the
                          absolute value of the difference in quality scores,
                          but at least 2.  Essentially, the new behavior
                          prevents a low quality base call that is likely a
                          sequencing error from significantly bringing down
                          the quality of a high quality, likely correct base
                          call.

  --interleaved-input     Instead of requiring files MATES_1.FASTQ and
                          MATES_2.FASTQ, allow a single file MATES.FASTQ that
                          has the paired-end reads interleaved.  Specify "-"
                          to read from standard input.

  --interleaved-output    Write the uncombined pairs in interleaved FASTQ
                          format.

  -I, --interleaved       Equivalent to specifying both --interleaved-input
                          and --interleaved-output.

  --tab-delimited-input   Assume the input is in tab-delimited format
                          rather than FASTQ, in the format described below in
                          '--tab-delimited-output'.  In this mode you should
                          provide a single input file, each line of which must
                          contain either a read pair (5 fields) or a single
                          read (3 fields).  FLASH will try to combine the read
                          pairs.  Single reads will be written to the output
                          file as-is if also using --tab-delimited-output;
                          otherwise they will be ignored.  Note that you may
                          specify "-" as the input file to read the
                          tab-delimited data from standard input.

  --tab-delimited-output  Write output in tab-delimited format (not FASTQ).
                          Each line will contain either a combined pair in the
                          format 'tag <tab> seq <tab> qual' or an uncombined
                          pair in the format 'tag <tab> seq_1 <tab> qual_1
                          <tab> seq_2 <tab> qual_2'.

  -o, --output-prefix=PREFIX
                          Prefix of output files.  Default: "out".

  -d, --output-directory=DIR
                          Path to directory for output files.  Default:
                          current working directory.

  -c, --to-stdout         Write the combined reads to standard output.  In
                          this mode, with FASTQ output (the default) the
                          uncombined reads are discarded.  With tab-delimited
                          output, uncombined reads are included in the
                          tab-delimited data written to standard output.
                          In both cases, histogram files are not written,
                          and informational messages are sent to standard
                          error rather than to standard output.

  -z, --compress          Compress the output files directly with zlib,
                          using the gzip container format.  Similar to
                          specifying --compress-prog=gzip and --suffix=gz,
                          but may be slightly faster.

  --compress-prog=PROG    Pipe the output through the compression program
                          PROG, which will be called as `PROG -c -',
                          plus any arguments specified by --compress-prog-args.
                          PROG must read uncompressed data from standard input
                          and write compressed data to standard output when
                          invoked as noted above.
                          Examples: gzip, bzip2, xz, pigz.

  --compress-prog-args=ARGS
                          A string of additional arguments that will be passed
                          to the compression program if one is specified with
                          --compress-prog=PROG.  (The arguments '-c -' are
                          still passed in addition to explicitly specified
                          arguments.)

  --suffix=SUFFIX, --output-suffix=SUFFIX
                          Use SUFFIX as the suffix of the output files
                          after ".fastq".  A dot before the suffix is assumed,
                          unless an empty suffix is provided.  Default:
                          nothing; or 'gz' if -z is specified; or PROG if
                          --compress-prog=PROG is specified.

  -t, --threads=NTHREADS  Set the number of worker threads.  This is in
                          addition to the I/O threads.  Default: number of
                          processors.  Note: if you need FLASH's output to
                          appear deterministically or in the same order as
                          the original reads, you must specify -t 1
                          (--threads=1).

  -q, --quiet             Do not print informational messages.

  -h, --help              Display this help and exit.

  -v, --version           Display version.

                                  PERFORMANCE

Since FLASH processes each read pair independently, it will, by default, process
read pairs in parallel.  It works quite fast, even with low-cost computing
resources.  As an example, we ran FLASH v1.2.6 on a laptop with a dual-core 2.3
GHz AMD x86_64 processor and it processed one million 100-bp read pairs in 24.5
seconds with the default parameters.  Less than 1 MB of memory was used.  Actual
timing results will vary, but they will depend primarily on the number of CPUs
available, the speed of each CPU, and on the I/O speed of reading the input
files and writing the output files.

                                   ACCURACY

With reads' error rate of 1% or less, FLASH processes over 99% of read pairs
correctly.  With error rate of 2%, FLASH processes over 98% of read pairs
correctly when default parameters are used. With more aggressive parameters
(i.e., -x 0.35), FLASH processes over 90% of read pairs correctly even when the
error rate is 5%.

                                  PUBLICATION

Title:   FLASH: fast length adjustment of short reads to improve genome assemblies
Authors: Tanja Magoč and Steven L. Salzberg
URL:     http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/21/2957.full

                                    LICENSE

FLASH is released under the GNU General Public License Version 3 or later (see
COPYING).

                          COMMENTS/QUESTIONS/REQUESTS

Send an e-mail to flash.comment@gmail.com

Other versions are available from the SourceForge page:

https://sourceforge.net/projects/flashpage/
